<appendix id="commands">

<!-- ToDo: Complete descriptions, e.g. from What's This.
           Link to more detailed description, e.g. in plugin chapter.
	Use KWord documentation as a reference.	 
-->

<appendixinfo>
<authorgroup>
<author><firstname>Volker</firstname> <surname>Paul</surname></author>
<!-- TRANS:ROLES_OF_TRANSLATORS -->
</authorgroup>

<date>2006-02-22</date>
</appendixinfo>

<title>Command Reference</title>

<note><para>The shortcut key combinations shown in this chapter are the 
default ones. They can be changed.
</para></note>



<sect1 id="menubar">
<title>The Menubar</title> <para>Note that some menu entries only appear when
they are applicable. Especially, some entries are linked to
<link linkend="plugin-tools">plugin</link>
functionality which is only available when the plugin is enabled.</para>






<!--  =======================   F I L E    ============================= -->

<sect2 id="menu-file">
<title>The <guimenu>File</guimenu> Menu</title>

<variablelist>
<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>N</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>File</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>N</accel>ew</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>Creates a new file. 
The user is prompted to select the directory (default: the current project's
source directory) and enter a file name. The file type can be selected from a list.
Also, the user can choose whether the file is to be added to the project.
Then the Automake Manager asks which target to add the new file to.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>O</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>File</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>O</accel>pen</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>Opens an existing file in a simple dialog
box.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>File</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Open <accel>R</accel>ecent</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>For opening the most recently edited files. Once you have clicked on this option, a list of recently edited files will appear. Select the file you want and KWord will open the file.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Alt;&Ctrl;<keycap>O</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>File</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Quick Open <accel>F</accel>ile</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>Presents a list of files in the current project's
source directory. The user can select from this list
or type a filename. That file is then opened.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>S</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>File</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>S</accel>ave</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>Saves the current file.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>File</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Save <accel>A</accel>s...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>Uses the
<guilabel>Save As...</guilabel> dialog box to let you save a copy
under a new name.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>File</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Save Al<accel>l</accel></guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>Saves all open files.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut><keycap>F5</keycap></shortcut>
<guimenu>File</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Reloa<accel>d</accel></guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>Reloads current file to show changes 
made by different programs.
(Note that such changes are normally detected automatically
and the user is prompted whether the file is to be reloaded.)
.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>File</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Rever<accel>t</accel> all</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Reverts all changes in opened files.
Prompts to save changes so the
reversion can be canceled for each
modified file.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>P</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>File</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>P</accel>rint...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>Prints the current file.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>File</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>E<accel>x</accel>port</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Exports the current file. Currently the following 
export formats are supported:
<variablelist>
<varlistentry><term>HTML</term><listitem><para>Syntax-highlighted HTML file</para></listitem></varlistentry>
</variablelist>
Other formats may follow in future KDevelop versions.

</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>F4</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>File</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>C</accel>lose</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Closes current file.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>File</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Clos<accel>e</accel> All</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Closes all open files.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>File</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Close All Ot<accel>h</accel>ers</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Closes all files except the current one.
Very useful if you opened a lot of files and you want 
to concentrate on the current one.
Without this, you would have to close them all
and re-open the current one.
</para>
<para>Note there is a similar command in the Window menu.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>Q</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>File</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>Q</accel>uit</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>Quits KDevelop.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

</variablelist>

</sect2>



<!--  =======================   E D I T    ============================= -->


<sect2 id="menu-edit">
<title>The <guimenu>Edit</guimenu> Menu</title>

<note><para>
Most of the following commands operate on the current file, 
also simply called "document".
</para></note>

<variablelist>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>Z</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Edit</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>U</accel>ndo</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Reverses the last action you performed.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Shift;<keycap>Z</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Edit</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Re<accel>d</accel>o</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Reverses the last Undo performed.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>X</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Edit</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Cu<accel>t</accel></guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Deletes the selected (highlighted) text from the document, and places a copy in the clipboard.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>C</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Edit</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>C</accel>opy</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Places a copy of the selected text in the clipboard.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>V</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Edit</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>P</accel>aste</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Inserts a copy of the clipboard into the current cursor position. 
If there is selected text, KDevelop replaces it with 
the contents of the clipboard. The clipboard is not altered. 
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>A</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Edit</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Select <accel>A</accel>ll</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Immediately selects all text of the current file.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Shift;<keycap>A</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Edit</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Dese<accel>l</accel>ect</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Every simple cursor movement (e.g. left, right etc. without Shift pressed)
deselects at the same time, i.e. if there was highlighted text before,
after the cursor action it will appear non-highlighted again.
This command does an explicit Deselect without cursor action.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Shift;<keycap>B</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Edit</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Bl<accel>o</accel>ck Selection Mode</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
KDevelop's editor can operate linewise or block-oriented.
Linewise means: Text is seen as a sequence of characters
that may span several lines. A selection ranges from the first
to the last character and includes all lines in-between completely.
</para><para>
Block-oriented means: Text is seen as a rectangular matrix.
You can select a rectangular block (called rectangle in (X)Emacs)
that leaves out the beginnings and ends of all lines.
The commands Cut and Copy then operate only on that block,
and place it in the clipboard.
</para><para>

Thus you can e.g. indent all lines of a block:
Select the block, Cut it, then place the cursor in the first line
at the beginning of the area you want to put the block,
e.g. 3 characters to the right of the old position.
There, Paste it, and all lines will be indented.
</para><para>

This would be very useful if it honored the overwrite flag (e.g. block comment).
It doesn't, and I see this as a bug.
TODO:
- report bug
- work out more examples how block mode is useful (extra chapter?)
- links to alternate methods (for indent: Edit - Reformat Source, comment)

</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul"><keycap>Insert</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Edit</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Overwr<accel>i</accel>te Mode</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Toggles Insert/Overwrite Mode.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>F</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Edit</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>F</accel>ind</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Calls the Find dialog box. You can search simple text or 
a regular expression.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul"><keycap>F3</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Edit</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Find <accel>N</accel>ext</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
After first using Find (see above), finds the same text
or regular expression again.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Shift;<keycap>F3</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Edit</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Find Pre<accel>v</accel>ious</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
After first using Find (see above), finds the same text
or regular expression again, searching upwards.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>R</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Edit</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>R</accel>eplace</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Opens the Find/Replace dialog box. You can search simple text or 
a regular expression. You can replace by simple text or
placeholders of the regular expression.

</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>G</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Edit</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>G</accel>o to Line</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Prompts for a line number and jumps to that line.
You can show/hide line numbers with View - Show/Hide Line Numbers (F11).
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Alt;&Ctrl;<keycap>F</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Edit</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Find in Fi<accel>l</accel>es</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Finds text in several Files, like the grep Unix command. 
Matches will be displayed, and you can switch to a match directly.
TODO!!!
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Shift;<keycap>R</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Edit</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Find-<accel>S</accel>elect-Replace</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Opens the project wide string replacement dialog. There you
can enter a string or a regular expression which is then
searched for within all files in the locations
you specify. Matches will be displayed in the Replace window, you
can replace them with the specified string, 
exclude them from replace operation or cancel the whole replace.

</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Edit</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>R</accel>eformat Source</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Reformats Source code using the astyle library.
If there is a selection, only the selection will be formatted.
Otherwise the entire file will be formatted.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>J</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Edit</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>E</accel>xpand Text</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
A list of reasonable completions of the current word is presented,
the user can select one of them, and this is then placed in the text.
For example, if the user has typed "whi" and calls this command,
"while" and "while ( ) { }" are offered. If the user selects the latter,
the whole structure of a while command is entered and 
the cursor is placed in the brackets to enter the condition.
TODO: BUG: Ctrl-J doesn't work
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>L</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Edit</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>E<accel>x</accel>pand Abbreviation</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Expands abbreviation. Abbreviations can be defined in 
Settings - Configure KDevelop - Abbreviations.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>Space</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Edit</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Complete Text</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Completes current expression using memory class store
for the current project and persistant class stores for
external libraries. TODO
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul"><keycap>F2</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Edit</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>M</accel>ake Member</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Creates a class member function in implementation file
based on the member declaration at the current line. TODO
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


</variablelist>

</sect2>



<!--  =======================   V I E W   ============================= -->


<sect2 id="menu-view">

<title>The <guimenu>View</guimenu> Menu</title>

<variablelist>
<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>View</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Back</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Moves back in the list of tabs.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>View</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Forward</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Moves forward in the list of tabs.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>/</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>View</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Switch to...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Presents a dialog box to select a tab buffer an moves there.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Alt;<keycap>C</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>View</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Raise Editor</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Places the focus on the editor.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul"><keycap>F4</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>View</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Next Error</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Switches to the file and line the next (compilation) error
was reported from.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Shift;<keycap>F4</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>View</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Previous Error</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Switches to the file and line the previous (compilation) error
was reported from.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Shift;<keycap>F</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>View</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Full Screen Mode</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
In normal mode: Switches to Full Screen Mode. Only KDevelop's window
will be shown, without the frame.</para>
<para>In Full Screen Mode: Switches back to normal mode. Other windows will be visible again,
KDevelop's window gets its frame again.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>F12</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>View</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Switch Header/Implementation</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
When in a C++ implementation file, switches to the corresponding header file,
and vice versa.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>View</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Tool Views</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Puts the focus on one of KDevelop's various tools resp. its output.
Switch back to the editor with the View - Raise editor command above.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>View</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Tool Docks</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
KDevelop's GUI has a Top, Bottom, Left and Right Tool Dock.
With this command, you can select and switch to any of them.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul"><keycap>F7</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>View</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Switch to Command Line</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
KDevelop uses Katepart as editor.
Katepart has a command line to enter editing commands directly.
This menu item switches to the Katepart Command Line.
For a list of available editing commands, 
enter <userinput><command>help</command> <option>list</option></userinput> here.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>View</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Schema</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Schema TODO ???
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul"><keycap>F10</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>View</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Dynamic Word Wrap</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Switches Dynamic Word Wrap on and off. If it is on, then
lines that don't fit on the screen will be broken and
continued on the next line.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>View</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Dynamic Word Wrap Indicators</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Selects Dynamic Word Wrap Indicators option:
<variablelist>
<varlistentry><term>Off</term>
   <listitem><para>Indicators (folded arrows in the line number border) are not displayed</para></listitem></varlistentry>
<varlistentry><term>Follow line numbers</term>
   <listitem><para>If line numbers (see command below) are displayed (in the line number border),
      then Dynamic Word Wrap Indicators are displayed as well</para></listitem></varlistentry>
<varlistentry><term>Always On</term><listitem><para>Dynamic Word Wrap Indicators 
   are always displayed, which causes the border to be present</para></listitem></varlistentry>
</variablelist>

</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>View</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Show/Hide Static Word Wrap Marker</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Shows/Hides the Static Word Wrap Marker, a vertical line drawn at the 
word wrap column as defined in Settings - Configure Editor - Editing - Static Word Wrap.
(TODO: Bug: the line is not shown. Static word wrap works for newly changed lines)
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul"><keycap>F6</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>View</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Show/Hide Icon Border</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Shows/Hides the Icon Border which is used to show 
e.g. bookmark and breakpoint symbols.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul"><keycap>F11</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>View</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Show/Hide Line Numbers</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Show/Hide Line Numbers on the left side, in the line number border.
This may also cause dynamic word wrap markers to be displayed,
see above.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>View</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Show/Hide Scrollbar Marks</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Show/Hide Scrollbar Marks. TODO: No effect, bug?
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul"><keycap>F9</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>View</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Show/Hide Folding Marks</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Shows/Hides Folding Marks in the left border.
Note that code folding (see below) can be used even if
the marks are not shown.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>View</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>C</accel>ode Folding</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Code folding is used to easily gain an overview of the code
by collapsing blocks so they are shown as just the top line.
The commands in this submenu collapse or expand the  local or top level.
<variablelist>
   <varlistentry>
      <term>
         <menuchoice>
	    <shortcut>
            <keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Shift;<keycap>-</keycap></keycombo>
	    </shortcut>
	    <guimenuitem><accel>C</accel>ollapse Toplevel</guimenuitem>
	 </menuchoice>
      </term>
      <listitem><para>Collapses toplevel. </para></listitem>
   </varlistentry>
   <varlistentry>
      <term>
         <menuchoice>
	    <shortcut>
            <keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Shift;<keycap>+</keycap></keycombo>
	    </shortcut>
	    <guimenuitem><accel>E</accel>xpand Toplevel</guimenuitem>
	 </menuchoice>
      </term>
      <listitem><para>Expands toplevel. </para></listitem>
   </varlistentry>
   <varlistentry>
      <term>
         <menuchoice>
	    <shortcut>
            <keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>-</keycap></keycombo>
	    </shortcut>
	    <guimenuitem>Collapse One <accel>L</accel>ocal Level</guimenuitem>
	 </menuchoice>
      </term>
      <listitem><para>Collapses innermost local level. </para></listitem>
   </varlistentry>
   <varlistentry>
      <term>
         <menuchoice>
	    <shortcut>
            <keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>+</keycap></keycombo>
	    </shortcut>
	    <guimenuitem>Expand <accel>O</accel>ne Local Level</guimenuitem>
	 </menuchoice>
      </term>
      <listitem><para>Expands innermost local level.</para></listitem>
   </varlistentry>

</variablelist>
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>View</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Set Encoding</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
In former KDevelop versions the Set Encoding function
now in the Tools menu used to be here.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>



</variablelist>

</sect2>




<!--  =======================   P R O J E C T    ============================= -->


<sect2 id="menu-project">
<title>The <guimenu><accel>P</accel>roject</guimenu> Menu</title>

<variablelist>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Project</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>N</accel>ew Project...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
This starts KDevelop's application wizard. 
It helps you to generate a skeleton for your 
application from a set of templates.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Project</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>O</accel>pen Project...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Opens a Kdevelop2 or KDevelop3 project.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Project</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Open <accel>R</accel>ecent Project</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Opens recently edited project. 
A submenu of recently edited projectj is displayed to choose from.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Project</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>I</accel>mport existing Project...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Creates a KDevelop project file for a given directory,
where already existing code files of a non-KDevelop project are stored.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<!--
<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Project</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Active Language</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
???TODOActive Language
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
-->


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Project</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>N<accel>e</accel>w Class...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Calls the New Class wizard.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Project</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>C</accel>lass Inheritance Diagram</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Displays inheritance relationship between classes in the project.
<note><para>This does not display classes outside inheritance hierarchy.</para></note>
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Project</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>A</accel>dd Translation...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Prompts the user for a language and 
creates .po file for the selected language.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Project</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>B</accel>uild Configuration</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
???TODO
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Project</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>D</accel>istribution &amp; Publishing</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Opens the Project Distribution &amp; Publishing dialog which
helps users package and publish their software. TODO:link
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Project</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>P</accel>roject Options...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Opens dialog to set project options.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Project</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>C<accel>l</accel>ose Project</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Closes current project.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>




</variablelist>

</sect2>


<!--  =======================   B U I L D    ============================= -->


<sect2 id="menu-build">
<title>The <guimenu>Bu<accel>i</accel>ld</guimenu> Menu</title>

<variablelist>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul"><keycap>F8</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Build</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>B</accel>uild Project</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Runs make from the project directory.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul"><keycap>F7</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Build</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Build <accel>A</accel>ctive Target</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Constructs a series of make commands to build an active target.
Also builds dependent targets.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Build</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Compile <accel>F</accel>ile</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Runs make filename.o from the directory
where filename is the name of the currently opened file.
TODO better formulation
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Build</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Run Configure</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Run Configure
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Build</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Ru<accel>n</accel> automake &amp; friends</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Executes
<blockquote>
<procedure><step><para>
<command>make</command> <option>-f</option> <replaceable>Makefile.cvs</replaceable>
</para></step>
<step><para>
<command>./configure</command>
</para></step></procedure>
</blockquote>
commands from the project directory.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Build</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>I</accel>nstall</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Runs <command>make install</command> command from the project directory.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Build</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Install (as root <accel>u</accel>ser)</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Asks the user for the root password using 
<application>kdesu</application> and then
runs <command>make install</command> as root user.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Build</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>C</accel>lean project</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Runs <command>make clean</command> command from the project directory.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Build</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>D</accel>istclean</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Runs <command>make distclean</command> command from the project directory.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Shift;<keycap>F9</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Build</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Make Messages &amp; Merge</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Runs <command>make packages-messages</command> command from the project directory.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Build</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>E</accel>xecute Program</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Executes program specified in project settings, Run Options tab.
If it is not specified there then the active target is used
to determine the application to run.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Build</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Build A<accel>P</accel>I Documentation</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Runs <application>doxygen</application> on a project Doxyfile
to generate API documentation.
If the search engine is enabled in Doxyfile,
this also runs <application>doxytag</application> to create it.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Build</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>C<accel>l</accel>ean API Documentation</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Removes all files generated by doxygen.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul"><keycap>Escape</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Build</guimenu>
<guimenuitem><accel>S</accel>top</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Stop application started with the Execute menuitem above,
and all running processes started by KDevelop
like building process, grep command etc.
</para>
<para>
On the toolbar, this action provides a popup menu
to choose a process to stop.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>




</variablelist>

</sect2>



<!--  =======================   D E B U G    ============================= -->


<sect2 id="menu-debug">
<title>The <guimenu><accel>D</accel>ebug</guimenu> Menu</title>

<variablelist>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Debug</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Start</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Start
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Debug</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Stop</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Stop
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Debug</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Interrupt</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Interrupt
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Debug</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Run to Cursor</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Run to Cursor
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Debug</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Step Over</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Step Over
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Debug</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Step over Instruction</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Step over Instruction
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Debug</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Step Into</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Step Into
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Debug</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Step into Instruction</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Step into Instruction
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Debug</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Step Out</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Step Out
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Debug</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Toggle Breakpoint</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Toggle Breakpoint
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Debug</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Viewers</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Viewers
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Debug</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Examine Core File...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Examine Core File...
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Debug</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Attach to Process</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Attach to Process
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Debug</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Valgrind Memory Leak Check</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Valgrind Memory Leak Check
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Debug</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Profile with KCachegrind</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Profile with KCachegrind
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>




</variablelist>

</sect2>





<!--  =======================   B O O K M A R K S   ============================= -->



<sect2 id="menu-bookmarks">
<title>The <guimenu><accel>B</accel>ookmarks</guimenu> Menu</title>

<variablelist>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>B</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Bookmarks</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Set Bookmark</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>Add current selection to your
bookmarks.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Bookmarks</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Clear All Bookmarks</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>Clear All Bookmarks.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
</variablelist>

</sect2>




<!--  =======================   W I N D O W   ============================= -->


<sect2 id="menu-window">
<title>The <guimenu><accel>W</accel>indow</guimenu> Menu</title>

<variablelist>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Alt;<keycap>W</keycap></keycombo></shortcut>
<guimenu>Window</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Close Selected Windows...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>Close Selected Windows...</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>F4</keycap></keycombo></shortcut>
<guimenu>Window</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Close</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>Close</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Window</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Close All</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>Close All</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Window</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Close All Others</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>Close All Others</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


</variablelist>

</sect2>






<!--  =======================   T O O L S   ============================= -->


<sect2 id="menu-tools">
<title>The <guimenu><accel>T</accel>ools</guimenu> Menu</title>

<variablelist>
<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Read Only Mode</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Read Only Mode
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Filetype Mode</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Filetype Mode
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Highlight Mode</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Highlight Mode
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Set Encoding</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Set Encoding (former View menu?))
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>End of Line</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
End of Line
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Spelling</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Spelling
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>I</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Indent</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Indent
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Shift;<keycap>I</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>unindent</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
unindent
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Clean Indentation</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Clean Indentation
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>Tab</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Align</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Align
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>D</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Comment</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Comment
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Shift;<keycap>D</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Uncomment</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Uncomment
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>U</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Uppercase</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Uppercase
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Shift;<keycap>U</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Lowercase</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Lowercase
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Alt;&Ctrl;<keycap>U</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Capitalize</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Capitalize
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>J</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Join Lines</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Join Lines
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Word Wrap Document</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Word Wrap Document
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Difference Viewer...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Difference Viewer...
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Execute Command...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Execute Command...
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Filter Selection Through Command...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Filters selection through external command using 
<link linkend="KDevFilter">the Filter plugin</link>.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Debug Regular Expression...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Debug Regular Expression...
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Part Explorer</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Part Explorer
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Alt;&Ctrl;<keycap>C</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Quick Open Class...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Quick Open Class...
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Alt;&Ctrl;<keycap>M</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Quick Open Method...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Quick Open Method...
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Alt;&Ctrl;<keycap>P</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Preview Doxygen Output</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Preview Doxygen Output
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Shift;<keycap>S</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Tools</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Document Current Function</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Document Current Function
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>



</variablelist>

</sect2>




<!--  =======================   S E T T I N G S   ============================= -->


<sect2 id="menu-settings">
<title>The <guimenu><accel>S</accel>ettings</guimenu> Menu</title>


<variablelist>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>M</keycap></keycombo></shortcut>
<guimenu>Settings</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Show/Hide Menubar</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>Show/Hide the menubar.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Settings</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Toolbars</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>Opens a sub menu where you can choose to show or hide 
the various Toolbars.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Settings</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Show Statusbar</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>Show the Statusbar.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Settings</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Configure Shortcuts...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Configure Shortcuts...
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Settings</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Configure Toolbar...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Configure Toolbar...
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Settings</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Configure Notifications...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Configure Notifications...
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Settings</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Configure Editor...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Configure Editor...
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Settings</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Configure KDevelop...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Configure KDevelop...
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>




</variablelist>

</sect2>


<!--  =======================   H E L P   ============================= -->


<sect2 id="menu-help">
<title>The <guimenu><accel>H</accel>elp</guimenu> Menu</title>

<variablelist>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Help</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>KDevelop Handbook</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>View this document.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo
 action="simul">&Shift;<keycap>F1</keycap></keycombo></shortcut>
<guimenu>Help</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>What's This?</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>Draws a question mark (?) beside the mouse
pointer, clicking on a window item such as the
<guiicon>Stop</guiicon> button will then display a brief explanation. 
<!-- See
<link linkend="bubble">Tooltips and What's This?</link>.-->
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Help</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Tip of the Day</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Tip of the Day
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Alt;&Ctrl;<keycap>I</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Help</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Look in Documentation Index...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Look in Documentation Index...
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut>
<keycombo action="simul">&Alt;&Ctrl;<keycap>S</keycap></keycombo>
</shortcut>
<guimenu>Help</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Search in Documentation...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Search in Documentation...
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Help</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Man Page...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Man Page...
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Help</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Info Page...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>
Info Page...
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>


<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Help</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Report Bug...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>Report bug.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Help</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>About KDevelop...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>Display some brief information about
KDevelop's version number, authors and license agreement.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<guimenu>Help</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>About KDE...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>Show some information about the version of &kde; that
you are running.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

</variablelist>

</sect2>



</sect1>




</appendix>
