<chapter id="survey-manual">
<title>What This Manual Contains</title>

<para>
This user manual is intended to describe the contents and use of the &kdevelop; &kdevrelease; Integrated Development Environment (IDE) from a user's point of view. It is not a programming manual, nor does it describe the development process in detail. Its only aim is to guide you in the handling of the IDE.
</para>
<para>
Here you will find information on the following topics:
</para>
<variablelist>
<varlistentry>
<term><link linkend="getting-started">Getting Started with &kdevelop; &mdash; a Guided Tour</link> </term>
<listitem>
<para>Gives you a quick start on the use of this &IDE;, introducing the basic steps of how to work on a project.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><link linkend="kdevelop-survey">Overview of the Features of
 &kdevelop;</link></term>
<listitem>
<para>Extends the guided tour in the previous chapter, giving an overall
view of what is built-in within &kdevelop; and gets you acquainted with the
look and feel of this &IDE;.</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><link linkend="setup">Configuring &kdevelop;</link></term>
<listitem>
<para>Shows how you can tailor the &IDE; to suit your needs.</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><link linkend="applicationwizard">Getting started: the
&appwizard;</link></term>
<listitem>
<para>Describes the basics of how to set up a new project in &kdevelop;
using the built-in &appwizard;.</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><link linkend="editing">Editing tools</link></term>
<listitem>
<para>All you need to write your source files: using the editor, searching
for text both locally and project-wide, up to integrating new files and
classes into the project.</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><link linkend="file-browsers">The File Browsers</link></term>
<listitem>
<para>Demonstrates various tools to look at the structure of your project
and how to access the files you want to work with.</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><link linkend="class-browsers">The Class Browsers</link></term>
<listitem>
<para>Describes one of the most powerful tools of &kdevelop; which lets you
navigate through class dependencies and allows you to easily create and
access the classes and methods you need.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><link linkend="documentation">Documentation</link></term>
<listitem>
<para>Shows how to access the rich built-in documentation &kdevelop;
provides and tells you how to create documentation of your project, concise
and powerful &API; documentation providing you an overall view of all your
project sources as well as docbook-based user documentation.</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><link linkend="project-management">Building and Project
 Management</link></term>
<listitem>
<para>Deals with the creation and management of your project; describing the
basics of autoconf and automake as well as how to set up custom make files
and how to use compiler or make options to tailor your application to suit
your needs.</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><link linkend="adv-build-management">Advanced Build
 Management</link></term>
<listitem>
<para>Looks at ways to keep multiple build configurations, to cross-compile
for diverse platforms, or to make an embedded system using the
<application>Qt/embedded</application> library.</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><link linkend="debugger">The Debugger Interface</link></term>
<listitem>
<para>Describes how to use the integrated <application>gdb</application>
debugger interface so you can hunt down bugs without leaving
&kdevelop;.</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<!-- ### Currently disabled. Probably too specialized programming stuff. Check later again.
  <listitem><para>
  <link linkend="python">Python</link> &mdash; an overview of how to create Python-based applications in &kdevelop;.
  </para></listitem>
  <listitem><para>
  <link linkend="php">PHP</link> &mdash;  an overview of how to create PHP-based HTML applications in &kdevelop;.
  </para></listitem>//-->

<varlistentry>
<term><link linkend="cvs">Using CVS</link></term>
<listitem>
<para>Tells you how you can maintain your project using the CVS versioning
system; a must, especially if many developers work on the same
project.</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
</variablelist>

<!--
  <listitem><para>
  <link linkend="kdevelop-scripting">Scripting &kdevelop;</link> &mdash; describes how to add scripts to automate &kdevelop;.
  </para></listitem>


  <listitem><para>
  Some commonly used information has been put into the <emphasis>appendix</emphasis>. Amongst others this consists of:
-->
<para>
Some commonly used information has been put into the <emphasis>appendix</emphasis>. Amongst others this consists of:
</para>

<variablelist>
<varlistentry>
<term><link linkend="kdevelop-install">Installing &kdevelop;</link></term>
<listitem>
<para>Tells you where to obtain &kdevelop; and how to get it up and
running.</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
</variablelist>

<variablelist>
<varlistentry>
<term><link linkend="nutshell">In a Nutshell &mdash; Tips and
Tricks</link></term>
<listitem>
<para>A quick reference to commonly used commands and actions. And a short
guide to solve common problems when working with
&kdevelop;.</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><link linkend="unixdev">Development on &UNIX;</link></term>
<listitem>
<para>A historical overview of &UNIX; program development, the main tools
necessary and why you need an &IDE;.</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<!--    
    <listitem><para>
    <link linkend="app-menus">Menus and Toolbars Overview</link> &mdash; provides you with a short overall view of the menu and toolbar selections available.
    </para></listitem>

    <listitem><para>
      <link linkend="app-shortcuts">Shortcut Keys</link> &mdash; the keys you can use to work with &kdevelop; without resorting to the mouse.
    </para></listitem>
-->

<varlistentry>
<term><link linkend="app-files">Configuration Files Used by
 &kdevelop;</link></term>
<listitem><para>Lists the files &kdevelop; uses to save its internal
 information. This is particularly useful in case something went wrong with
 your setup.</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry><term>
<link linkend="plugin-tools">Plugin Tools</link>
</term><listitem><para>Lists the pluggable tools you can use to taylor the capabilities of
&kdevelop; to your needs.
</para></listitem></varlistentry>

<!--  
  <listitem><para>
  <link linkend="plugin-tools">Plugin tools</link> &mdash; provides you with an overview of the parts which make up &kdevelop; and how you can tailor it to suit your needs by only loading the parts that are necessary, both IDE and project-wide.
  </para></listitem>
-->
<varlistentry><term>    
<link linkend="app-uimodes-examples">KDevelop User Interface Mode Examples </link>
</term><listitem><para>Shows user interface modes.
</para></listitem></varlistentry>
  
<varlistentry><term>
<link linkend="app-misc-info">Further Information </link> </term><listitem><para>
Getting Information, reporting Bugs etc.
</para></listitem></varlistentry>
  
<varlistentry><term>
<link linkend="app-changelog">Changelog </link>
</term><listitem><para>Shows the history of this documentation.
</para></listitem></varlistentry>
  
<varlistentry><term>
<link linkend="app-bibliography">Bibliography </link> 
</term><listitem><para>Bibliography 
</para></listitem></varlistentry>

</variablelist>  
    <!--
    <listitem><para>
    <link linkend="documentation-index">Index </link> &mdash; 
    </para></listitem>
-->  

  
</chapter>
