<!DOCTYPE book PUBLIC "-//KDE//DTD DocBook V3.1-Based Variant V1.0//EN" [
 <!ENTITY kdevelop "<application>kdevelop</application>">
 <!ENTITY % addindex "IGNORE">
 <![ %addindex; [ <!ENTITY docindex SYSTEM "docindex.docbook"> ]]>
]>

<book lang="en">
<bookinfo>
<title>Welcome to KDevelop</title>
<authorgroup>
<author>
<firstname>Ralf</firstname>
<surname>Nolden</surname>
<affiliation>
<orgname>The KDevelop Team</orgname>
<address><email>Ralf.Nolden@post.rwth-aachen.de</email></address>
</affiliation>
</author>
</authorgroup>
<date>26/05/2000</date>
<releaseinfo>1.00.00</releaseinfo>
<abstract>
<para>This is the introductory text to KDevelop</para>
</abstract>
<keywordset>
<keyword>KDE</keyword>
<keyword>KDevelop</keyword>
<keyword>welcome</keyword>
</keywordset>
</bookinfo>

<chapter id="welcome">
<title>Welcome To KDevelop !
</title>
<subtitle>Welcome to the KDevelop Integrated Development Environment !</subtitle>

<para>The KDevelop IDE has been designed by the KDevelop Team to provide an easy-to use environment for C/C++ programmers. With all it's
features the current version contains, the full amount of programming knowledge of the team has been collected to add a set of
documentation handbooks that will help beginners as well as experts in various parts of using their IDE. We hope to give you the
environment you need and like to use for creating your application that contributes to the K Desktop Environment and the free software
community as well as for any commercial purpose.</para>

<para>Currently, the KDevelop Documentation spans over four handbooks full of well-written, informative and understandable text that will
enable you to start developing your applications, including an extra handbook for the upcoming KDE 2 development framework:</para>

<para><variablelist>
<varlistentry>
<term></term>
<listitem>
<para>The Reference Guide to the KDevelop Integrated Development Environment for Unix Systems, Version 1.2.</para>
<para><emphasis>The User Manual to KDevelop contains a full description of the available functionality the IDE provides. Additionally, it gives you
an informative description about projects in general and the way they are set up using GNU standard development tools.</emphasis></para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term></term>
<listitem>
<para>The User Guide to C++ Application Design for the K Desktop Environment (KDE) with the KDevelop IDE, Version 1.2.</para>
<para><emphasis>The Programming Handbook covers all topics that are related to actually using the IDE. It contains a description of project types
and explains the basics about KDE and Qt applications as well as a complete description of the sourcecode generated by KDevelop's
application wizard. Further, various steps of the development process are described such as writing documentation and installation
settings for your project files in conjunction with the KDE File System Standard.</emphasis></para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term></term>
<listitem>
<para>The KDE Application Tutorials Handbook for the KDevelop Integrated Development Environment, a tutorial collection on how to create
KDE applications by examples and describes how to build the tutorial examples included with the Qt library.</para>
<para><emphasis>The KDE Application Tutorials handbook contains an informative instruction for beginners and advanced developers to learn about Qt
and KDE application design by creating sample projects. Beginning with creating the tutorials included with the Qt library
documentation, the user is lead over to the Qt examples and the KDE application projects. Issues that are addressed in the KDevelop
Programming Handbook will be explained in full detail by example usage.</emphasis></para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term></term>
<listitem>
<para>The Reference Guide to C++ Application Design for the K Desktop Environment (KDE).</para>
<para><emphasis>The reference guide contains a structured information on the KDE Application Framework and covers issues like eventhandling, signals/slots,
provided GUI-elements and the usage of standard dialogs for required user input. Furthermore it contains portability information for
known Qt 2.0 / KDE 2 issues regarding the standard KDE application framework.</emphasis></para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term></term>
<listitem>
<para>A collection of already existing documentation for the KDE 2 API usage including KOM/OpenParts issues by various KDE authors</para>
<para><emphasis>This handbook is a collection of already existing articles targeting towards KDE 2 development that have been written by various KDE
authors. It generally covers the new facilities and technologies that KDE 2 will offer developers as well as discussing implementation
issues.</emphasis></para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
</variablelist>
</para>
</chapter>
<![ %addindex; [ &docindex; ]]>
</book>
<!--
Local Variables:
mode: sgml
sgml-omittag: nil
sgml-shorttag: t
sgml-general-insert-case: lower
End:
-->
